---
title: "Multiscale modeling of calcium signaling in the cardiac dyad"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2005-01-31-Multiscale-modeling-of-calcium-signaling-in-the-cardiac-dyad
excerpt: 'Multiscale modeling of calcium signaling in the cardiac dyad'
date: 2006-10-01
venue: 'Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006349505730897'
citation: RAIMOND L. WINSLOW, ANTTI TANSKANEN, MINDAO CHEN, AND JOSEPH L. GREENSTEIN (2005) Multiscale Modeling of Calcium Signaling in the Cardiac Dyad,
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1080: 362-375
---
Calcium (Ca2+)-induced Ca2+-release (CICR) takes place
in spatially restricted microdomains known as dyads. The length scale
over which CICR occurs is on the order of nanometers and relevant time
scales range from micro- to milliseconds. Quantitative understanding
of CICR therefore requires development of models that are applicable
over a range of spatio-temporal scales. We will present several new approaches for multiscale modeling of CICR. First, we present a model
of dyad Ca2+ dynamics in which the Fokker-Planck equation (FPE) is
solved for the probability P(x, t) that a Ca2+ ion is located at dyad position x at time t. Using this model, we demonstrate that (a) Ca2+ signaling
in the dyad is mediated by approximately tens of Ca2+ ions; (b) these
signaling events are noisy due to the small number of ions involved; and
(c) the geometry of the RyR (ryanodine receptors) protein may function
to restrict the diffusion of and to “funnel” Ca2+ ions to activation-binding
sites on the RyR, thus increasing RyR open probability and excitationcontraction (EC) coupling gain. Simplification of this model to one in
which the dyadic space is represented using a single compartment yields
the stochastic local-control model of CICR developed previously. We have
shown that this model captures fundamental properties of CICR, such
as graded release and voltage-dependent gain, may be integrated within
a model of the myocyte and may be simulated in reasonable times using a
combination of efficient numerical methods and parallel computing, but
remains too complex for general use in cell simulations. To address this
problem, we show how separation of time scales may be used to formulate
a model in which nearby L-type Ca2+ channels (LCCs) and RyRs gate as
a coupled system that may be described using low-dimensional systems of
ordinary differential equations, thus reducing computational complexity while capturing fundamentally important properties of CICR. The
simplified model may be solved many orders of magnitude faster than
can either of the more detailed models, thus enabling incorporation into
tissue-level simulations.